docs: add a Concepts/CPU docs page (#18924)
hashicorp/nomad: website/content/docs/concepts/cpu.mdx

cpu.numcores                    = 32
cpu.numcores.efficiency         = 16
cpu.numcores.performance        = 16
cpu.reservablecores             = 32
cpu.totalcompute                = 56000
cpu.usablecompute               = 56000
```

## Reserving CPU Resources

In the fingerprinted node attributes, `cpu.totalcompute` indicates the total
amount of CPU bandwidth the processor is capable of delivering. In some cases it
may be beneficial to reserve some amount of a Node's CPU resources for use by
the operating system and other non-Nomad processes. This can be done in client
configuration.

The amount of reserved CPU can be specified in bandwidth via `cpu`, e.g.

```hcl
client {
  reserved {
    cpu = 3000 # mhz
  }
}
```

Or the amount of reserved CPU can be specified by specifing a specific set of
`cores` on which to disallow the scheduling of Nomad tasks. This capability is
available on Linux systems only.

```hcl
client {
  reserved {
    cores = "0-3"
  }
}
```

Once the CPU is constrained by one of the above configurations, the node 
attribute `cpu.usablecompute` will indicate the total amount of CPU bandwdith
available for scheduling of Nomad tasks.

> ## Allocating CPU Resources

Reviewer: Something that feels missing from this doc is the mapping of scheduled CPU resources to what the task driver might (or might not!) do with that resource reservation. We have the `cpu_hard_limits` described below almost as an exception to the typical behavior. We should probably discuss that typical behavior in this section?

Author: Oh good call, added a blurb about isolation behavior

> When scheduling a job a Task must specify how much CPU resource should be
> allocated on behalf of the task. This can be done in terms of bandwidth in MHz

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When scheduling jobs, a task must specify how much CPU resource should be
allocated on its behalf. This can be done in terms of bandwidth in MHz
```

with the `cpu` attribute.

```hcl
task {
  resources {
    cpu = 2000 # mhz
  }
}
```

On Linux systems, Nomad supports reserving whole CPU cores specifically for a
task. No task will be allowed to run on a CPU core reserved for another task.

```hcl
task {
  resources {
    cores = 4
  }
}
```

Nomad Enterprise supports NUMA aware scheduling, which enables operators to
more finely control which CPU cores may be reserved for tasks.

### CPU Hard Limits

> Some task drivers support the configuration option `cpu_hard_limit`. If enabled
> this option will restrict tasks from bursting above their CPU limit even

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some task drivers support the configuration option `cpu_hard_limit`. If enabled,
this option restricts tasks from bursting above their CPU limit even
```

when there is idle capacity on the node. The tradeoff is consistency versus
utilization. A task with too few CPU resources may operate fine until another
task is placed on the node causing a reduction in available CPU bandwidth, which
could cause distruption for the underprovisioned task.

### CPU Environment Variables

> To help tasks understand the resources available to them, Nomad sets environment
> variables in the runtime environment of each task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To help tasks understand the resources available to them, Nomad sets the following environment
variables in their runtime environment.
```

- `NOMAD_CPU_LIMIT` - The amount of CPU bandwidth allocated on behalf of the
task.

- `NOMAD_CPU_CORES` - The set of cores in [cpuset][] notation reserved for the task.
This value is only set if `resources.cores` is configured.

```env
NOMAD_CPU_CORES=3-5
NOMAD_CPU_LIMIT=9000
```

# NUMA

Nomad clients are commonly provisioned on real hardware in an on-premise
environment or in the cloud on large `.metal` instance types. In either case it
is likely the underlying server is designed around a [NUMA topology][numa_wiki].

> Any server that contains multiple CPU sockets or multiple RAM banks per CPU
> socket will be characterized by the non-uniform access times involved in
> accessing system memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Servers that contain multiple CPU sockets or multiple RAM banks per CPU
socket are characterized by the non-uniform access times involved in
accessing system memory.
```

[![NUMA](/img/nomad-numa.png)](/img/nomad-numa.png)

The simplified example machine above has the following topology
- 2 physical CPU sockets
- 4 system memory banks, 2 per socket
- 8 physical cpu cores (4 per socket)
- 2 logical cpu cores per physical core
- 4 PCI devices, 1 per memory bank

> ### optimizing performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optimizing performance
```

> Any OS process scheduled on core X where X belongs to  memory node M will take
> longer to access any memory node that is not M.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OS processes take longer to access memory nodes that don't belong to the core in which they're running.
```

Just to avoid some X and M variables .

Author: Ended up with

> Operating system processes take longer to access memory across a NUMA boundary.

> Using the example above if a task is scheduled on Core 0, accessing memory in
> Mem 1 might take 20% longer than accessing memory in Mem 0, and accessing memory
> in Mem 2 might take 300% longer. The extreme differences are due to various
> physical hardware limitations. A core accessing memory in its own NUMA node is
> optimal. Programs which perform a high throughput of reads or writes to/from
> system memory will have their performance substantially hindered by not optimizing
> their spatial locality iwth regard to the systems NUMA topology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the example above, if a task is scheduled on Core 0, accessing memory in
Mem 1 might take 20% longer than accessing memory in Mem 0, and accessing memory
in Mem 2 might take 300% longer. 

The extreme differences are due to various
physical hardware limitations. A core accessing memory in its own NUMA node is
optimal. Programs which perform a high throughput of reads or writes to/from
system memory will have their performance substantially hindered by not optimizing
their spatial locality with regard to the systems NUMA topology.
```

### SLIT tables

> Any modern machine will define System Locality Distance Information (SLIT)
> tables in its firmware. These tables are understood and made referenceable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modern machines define System Locality Distance Information (SLIT)
tables in their firmware. These tables are understood and made referenceable
```

> by the Linux kernel. There are two key pieces of information provided by SLIT

Reviewer 2: Boo...

> The relative distance between nodes on a system is stored in the ACPI System Locality Distance Information Table (SLIT), which is not exposed by any Windows functions.

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winbase/nf-winbase-getnumaproximitynode

I was curious if this was Linux-only.

Author: Well as long as we can associate core with NUMA node we can make `affinity = require` work on Windows. But without the SLIT data `affinity = prefer` will not work.

Author: Or at least, not well :sweat_smile:

> tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tables:
```

- Which CPU cores belong to which NUMA nodes
- The penalty incurred for accessing each NUMA node from a core in every other
NUMA node

The `lscpu` command can be used to describe the Core associativity on a machine.
For example on an `r6a.metal` EC2 instance:

```shell-session
$ lscpu | grep NUMA
NUMA node(s):           4
NUMA node0 CPU(s):      0-23,96-119
NUMA node1 CPU(s):      24-47,120-143
NUMA node2 CPU(s):      48-71,144-167
NUMA node3 CPU(s):      72-95,168-191
```

> And the associated performance degredations are available via `numactl`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the associated performance degradations are available via `numactl`
```

> And the associated performance degredations are available via `numactl`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And the associated performance degredations are available via `numactl`:
```

```shell-session
$ numactl -H
available: 4 nodes (0-3)
...
node distances:
node   0   1   2   3
  0:  10  12  32  32
  1:  12  10  32  32
  2:  32  32  10  12
  3:  32  32  12  10
```

These SLIT table "node distance" values are presented as approximate relative
ratios. The value of 10 represents an optimal situation where a memory access

> is occuring from a CPU that is part of the same NUMA node. A value of 20 for
> example would indicate a 200% performance degredation, 30 for 300%, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is occuring from a CPU that is part of the same NUMA node. A value of 20 
would indicate a 200% performance degredation, 30 for 300%, etc.
```

> ### node attributes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Node Attributes
```

> A Nomad client will fingerprint the machine's NUMA topology and export the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nomad clients fingerprint the machine's NUMA topology and export the
```

core associativity as node attributes. This data can provide a Nomad operator
a better understanding of when it might be useful to make use of NUMA aware
scheduling for certain workloads.

```
numa.node.count       = 4
numa.node0.cores      = 0-23,96-119
numa.node1.cores      = 24-47,120-143
numa.node2.cores      = 48-71,144-167
numa.node3.cores      = 72-95,168-191
```

> ## NUMA aware scheduling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## NUMA Aware Scheduling <EnterpriseAlert inline />
```

> ## NUMA aware scheduling

Reviewer 2: Is this also Linux-only?

Author: For now yes. We could conceivably make it work on Windows if there is demand.

> Starting in Nomad Enterprise 1.7, Nomad is capable of scheduling tasks in a way

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nomad Enterprise is capable of scheduling tasks in a way
```

With versioned docs I think we can avoid referencing specific versions in docs so things don't feel state.

that is optimized for the NUMA topology of a client node. A task may specify
a `numa` block indicating its NUMA optimization preference.

```hcl
task {
  resources {
    cores = 6
    numa {
      affinity = "require"
	}
  }
}
```

> ### affinity options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `affinity` Options
```

> Currently there are three supported affinity options: `none`, `prefer`, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are three supported affinity options: `none`, `prefer`, and
```

`require`, each with their own advantages and tradeoffs.

> #### none

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `none`
```

In the `none` mode the Nomad scheduler leverages the apathy of jobs without
preference of NUMA affinity to help reduce core fragmentation within NUMA nodes.
It does so by bin-packing the core request of these jobs onto the NUMA nodes
with the fewest unused cores available.

The `none` mode is the default mode if the `numa` block is not specified.

```hcl
resources {
  cores = 4
  numa {
    affinity = "none"
  }
}
```

> #### prefer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `prefer`
```

In the `prefer` mode the Nomad scheduler uses the hardware topology of a node
to calculate an optimized selection of available cores, but does not limit
those cores to come from a single NUMA node.

```hcl
resources {
  cores = 4
  numa {
    affinity = "prefer"
  }
}
```

> #### require

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `require`
```

In the `require` mode the Nomad scheduler uses the topology of each potential

> Client to find a set of available CPU cores that belong to the same NUMA node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
client to find a set of available CPU cores that belong to the same NUMA node.
```

---
layout: docs
page_title: CPU
description: Learn about how Nomad manages CPU resources.
---

# Modern Processors

Every Nomad node has a Central Processing Unit (CPU) providing the computational
power needed for running operating system processes. Nomad uses the CPU to
run tasks defined by the Nomad job submitter. For Nomad to know which nodes
have sufficient capacity for running a given task, each node in the cluster
is fingerprinted to gather information about the performance characteristics
of its CPU. The two metrics associated with each Nomad node with regard to
CPU performance are its bandwidth (how much it can _compute_) and the number
of cores.

> Modern CPUs may contain hetrogenous core types. Apple introduced the M1 CPU

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modern CPUs may contain heterogeneous core types. Apple introduced the M1 CPU
```

configuration.

The amount of reserved CPU can be specified in bandwidth via `cpu`.

```hcl
client {
  reserved {
    cpu = 3000 # mhz
  }
}
```

Or as a specific set of `cores` on which to disallow the scheduling of Nomad
tasks. This capability is available on Linux systems only.

```hcl
client {
  reserved {
    cores = "0-3"
  }
}
```

When the CPU is constrained by one of the above configurations, the node
attribute `cpu.usablecompute` indicates the total amount of CPU bandwdith
available for scheduling of Nomad tasks.

## Allocating CPU Resources

When scheduling jobs, a Task must specify how much CPU resource should be
allocated on its behalf. This can be done in terms of bandwidth in MHz
with the `cpu` attribute.

```hcl
task {
  resources {
    cpu = 2000 # mhz
  }
}
```

Note that the isolation mechansim around CPU resources is dependent on each
task driver and its configuration. The standard behavior is that Nomad ensures
a task has access to _at least_ as much of its allocated CPU bandwidth. In which
case if a node as idle CPU capacity, a task may use additional CPU resources.
Some task drivers enable limiting a task to use only the amount of bandwidth

> allocated to the task, described in the CPU Hard Limits section below.

Reviewer: It might be nice if we specifically referred to the typical control mechanism here, which is mapping Mhz to cpu shares 1:1.

in their firmware. These tables are understood and made referenceable by the
Linux kernel. There are two key pieces of information provided by SLIT tables:
- Which CPU cores belong to which NUMA nodes
- The penalty incurred for accessing each NUMA node from a core in every other
NUMA node

The `lscpu` command can be used to describe the Core associativity on a machine.
For example on an `r6a.metal` EC2 instance:

```shell-session
$ lscpu | grep NUMA
NUMA node(s):           4
NUMA node0 CPU(s):      0-23,96-119
NUMA node1 CPU(s):      24-47,120-143
NUMA node2 CPU(s):      48-71,144-167
NUMA node3 CPU(s):      72-95,168-191
```

And the associated performance degradations are available via `numactl`:

```shell-session
$ numactl -H
available: 4 nodes (0-3)
...
node distances:
node   0   1   2   3
  0:  10  12  32  32
  1:  12  10  32  32
  2:  32  32  10  12
  3:  32  32  12  10
```

These SLIT table "node distance" values are presented as approximate relative
ratios. The value of 10 represents an optimal situation where a memory access
is occuring from a CPU that is part of the same NUMA node. A value of 20 would

> indicate a 200% performance degredation, 30 for 300%, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
indicate a 200% performance degradation, 30 for 300%, etc.
```
